=head1 NAME

urclock (oUR CLOCK) -- clock and appointment reminder for X11

=head1 SYNOPSIS

   urclock [options]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<urclock> -- version B<@@RXVT_VERSION@@> -- is an analog clock
for X intended as an I<xclock>(1) replacement that conserves memory and has
extra features: B<urclock> enters reverse video if there is mail waiting; an
appointment reminder is also builtin.

=head2 OPTIONS

The options supported by B<urclock>:

=over

=item B<-display> I<displayname>

Attempt to open a window on the named X display. In the absence of this
option, the display specified by the C<DISPLAY> environment variable is used.

=item B<-geometry> I<geom>

Create the window with the specified X window
geometry [default C<80x80>].

=item B<-bg> I<color>

Window background color [default C<white>].

=item B<-fg> I<color>

Window foreground color [default C<black>].

=item B<-fn> I<fontname>

Select font
used for reminders [default C<7x14>].

=item B<-nodate>

Do not display today's date on the face of the clock.

=item B<-iconic>

Start iconified, if supported by the window manager.

=item B<-adjust> I<ddhhmm>

Adjust the clock by +/- I<ddhhmm> (I<dd> = days, I<hh> = hours, I<mm> =
minutes) to fix an incorrect clock without being root or for working in
another time-zone.

=item B<-update> I<n>

Update clock face every I<n> seconds [default C<30>]. If I<n>=1, a seconds
hand is displayed.

=item B<-mail> I<n>

Check for new mail every I<n> seconds [default C<60>]. The actual interval
is a multiple of the clock update interval.

=item B<-mailfile> I<mailfile>

Override environmental variable C<MAIL> with I<mailfile> as location for
mail.

=item B<-mailspawn> I<cmd>

Execute I<cmd> when the face of the clock is clicked by the mouse button.

=item B<#>I<geom>

Specify the preferred icon window size [default C<65x65>].

=back

Some of these options may not be available based on how urclock was
compiled. Run B<urclock -help> to determine which features are available.

=head1 X RESOURCES

No X resources are used -- only command-line options.

=head1 TITLES AND ICONS

The window and icon titles are set to the day of the week and the
date. The date is also displayed on the lower half of the clock unless the
B<-nodate> option is specified. The icon window is "active" and will show
the time, if supported by the window manager.

=head1 REMINDERS

The B<~/.rclock> file (note: I<not> B<~/.urclock>) lists the messages
to display and/or the programs to run at specified times and dates. At
the specified time, B<urclock> will pop-up a window in the center of
the screen to display the message or will simply run the scheduled
program. B<urclock> will read the B<~/.rclock> file at startup, and every
10 minutes (to look for changes) and after a message window has been
dismissed (to find the next appointment).

An entry in B<~/.rclock> may be one of two formats (blank and comment
lines will be ignored):

B<hh:mm  [dd]  MM/DD/YY message[; program]>

or

B<[hh:mm  [dd]  MM/DD/YY [message]]; program>

B<hh> - hour (0-23; * = current)

B<mm> - minute (0-59; * = 0)

B<dd> - days-of-week (some/all/none of umtwrfs; * = all)

B<MM> - month (1-12; * = current)

B<DD> - day of month (1-31; * = current)

B<YY> - year (0-99 or 1900-????; * = current)

B<message> - message to display

B<program> - program to execute

The days-of-the-week use the following abbreviations:
B<u>=Sunday, B<m>=Monday, B<t>=Tuesday, B<w>=Wednesday, B<r>=Thursday, B<f>=Friday, B<s>=Saturday,
B<*>=all.

If B<message> is empty and B<program> has been specified, it is executed
without a dialog box. If time/date are also not specified, B<program>
is executed on start-up. Note B<message> may contain escape values (\n:
newline, \;: semicolon).

Here's a silly example file that shows some of the permissible constructs:

   # ~/.rclock - My appointment file

   # startup functions
   ; xsetroot -solid Black &

   # cron functions

   10:00; xsetroot -solid Grey25 &
   14:00; xsetroot -solid Grey75 &

   # daily/weekly reminders

   08:15 mtwrf *      Good Morning!\\nRead News?; rxvt -e News
   12:00 mtwrf *      Lunch Time!
   17:00 mtwrf *      Go Home
   23:00 mtwrf *      Still Here? Go to bed
   08:10 twrf  *      Did you do your time card yesterday?
   15:00 f     *      Friday, do your time card early!
   16:00 mtwr  *      Do your time card
   16:30 mtwrf *      Did you do your time card?
   *:00  us    *      It's the weekend, why are you here?
   8:15  f     */13/* Friday the 13th! Careful!
   8:15  *     4/1/*  fkrkrmfismsmkd...dkdfk
   8:16  *     4/1/*  April Fools!

   # birthdays/anniversaries

   16:00    05/21/*   Pam's Birthday (next week)
   16:00    05/24/*   Pam's Birthday (in a few days)

   # once-of appointments

   08:30    03/15/94    Dentist appointment
   08:30    03/15/1999  Dentist appointment
   08:30    03/15/2004  Dentist appointment

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

B<urclock> uses the environment variable B<MAIL> to determine the location
of the user's mail spool file unless the B<-mailfile> option is specified.

=head1 BUGS

B<urclock> is not very smart about dealing with errors encountered while
reading the B<~/.rclock> file. Each reminder must be a single line not
exceeding 255 characters. Reminder windows are sometimes not redrawn (left
blank) when raised or uncovered.

=head1 AUTHORS

Rob Nation <nation@rocket.sanders.lockheed.com>

Modifications by mj olesen <olesen@me.QueensU.CA>

Modifications by Marc Lehmann <urclock@schmorp.de>

Modifications by Emanuele Giaquinta <emanuele.giaquinta@gmail.com>

=head1 Current Maintainer

Same as the current rxvt-unicode maintainer(s).

