=head1 NAME

@@RXVT_NAME@@c - control the @@RXVT_NAME@@d daemon

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<@@RXVT_NAME@@c> [same options as for @@RXVT_NAME@@]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This manpage describes the B<@@RXVT_NAME@@c> client program. It connects
to the B<@@RXVT_NAME@@d> daemon and requests a new terminal window. It
takes the same arguments as the B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> program. The environment
will also be respected. Currently, it always returns immediately after
contacting the daemon.

=head1 OPTIONS

All options that are valid for B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> are valid for
B<@@RXVT_NAME@@c>, too. Please note that options are interpreted in the
context of the daemon process. However, as current working directory,
process environment and any file descriptor (e.g. for C<-pty-fd>) are
preserved, this rarely makes a difference.

=head1 EXIT STATUS

If everything went well, @@RXVT_NAME@@c returns with an exit status of C<0>.
If contacting the daemon fails, it exits with the exit status C<2>. In all other error
cases it returns with status C<1>.

This can be used to implement auto-starting behaviour, by checking for an
exit status of C<2>, running C<@@RXVT_NAME@@d -f -q> and retrying the call
to @@RXVT_NAME@@c, like this:

   #!/bin/sh
   @@RXVT_NAME@@c "$@"
   if [ $? -eq 2 ]; then
      @@RXVT_NAME@@d -q -o -f
      @@RXVT_NAME@@c "$@"
   fi

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

All environment variables of the current process will be made available
to the new instance, and will be interpreted as if B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> were
started directly.

=over 4

=item B<RXVT_SOCKET>

Both @@RXVT_NAME@@c and @@RXVT_NAME@@d use the environment variable
F<RXVT_SOCKET> to create a listening socket and to contact the
@@RXVT_NAME@@d, respectively. If the variable is missing,
F<<< $HOME/.urxvt/urxvtd-I<< <nodename> >> >>> is used.  The variable must
specify the absolute path of the socket to create.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

@@RXVT_NAME@@(7), @@RXVT_NAME@@d(1)

