.if !\n(.g .ab GNU tbl requires GNU troff.
.if !dTS .ds TS
.if !dTE .ds TE
.TH "RXVT-UNICODE" "1"  "X Version 11" "X Tools" 
.SH "NAME" 
rxvt (ouR XVT) \- a VT102 emulator for the X window system
.PP 
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBrxvtd\fP
.PP
\fBrxvtc\fP [options] [\-e command [ args ]]
.PP 
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
\fBrxvtd\fP is a colour vt102 terminal
emulator intended as an \fIxterm\fP(1) replacement. \fBrxvtd\fP
implements the actual program that runs as daemon in background and
opens pseudo-ttys. You can run it from your X startup scripts, for
example, although it is not dependent on a working DISPLAY and, in fact,
can open windows on multiple X displays.
.PP
Both \fBrxvtd\fP and \fBrxvtc\fP use the environment variable
\fBRXVT_SOCKET\fP to create a listening socket and to contact
the \fBrxvtd\fP, respectively. If the variable is missing,
"\fB$HOME/.rxvt-unicode-\fP<nodename>" is used.
.PP 
\fBrxvtc\fP is the client program of this duo. It connects to the
\fBrxvtd\fP daemon and requests a new terminal window. It
takes the same arguments as the \fBrxvt\fP program. The environment will
also be respected. Currently, it always returns immediately after contacting
the daemon.
.PP 
The positive aspect of this client-server solution is faster creation
time for terminal windows and a lot of saved memory. The negative side is a
possible impact on stability - if the main program crashes, all
processes in the terminal windows are terminated.
.PP
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.PP 
\fIrxvt\fP(1), \fIsh\fP(1), \fI/usr/share/doc/rxvt\-unicode/README.unicode\fP

