=head1 NAME

rxvt-unicode (ouR XVT, unicode) - (a VT102 emulator for the X window system)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> [options] [-e command [ args ]]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<rxvt-unicode>, version B<@@RXVT_VERSION@@>, is a colour vt102 terminal
emulator intended as an I<xterm>(1) replacement for users who do not
require features such as Tektronix 4014 emulation and toolkit-style
configurability. As a result, B<rxvt-unicode> uses much less swap space --
a significant advantage on a machine serving many X sessions.

This document is also available on the World-Wide-Web at
L<http://pod.tst.eu/http://cvs.schmorp.de/rxvt-unicode/doc/rxvt.1.pod>.

=head1 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

See @@RXVT_NAME@@(7) (try C<man 7 @@RXVT_NAME@@>) for a list of
frequently asked questions and answer to them and some common
problems. That document is also accessible on the World-Wide-Web at
L<http://pod.tst.eu/http://cvs.schmorp.de/rxvt-unicode/doc/rxvt.7.pod>.

=head1 RXVT-UNICODE VS. RXVT

Unlike the original rxvt, B<rxvt-unicode> stores all text in Unicode
internally. That means it can store and display most scripts in the
world. Being a terminal emulator, however, some things are very difficult,
especially cursive scripts such as arabic, vertically written scripts
like mongolian or scripts requiring extremely complex combining rules,
like tibetan or devanagari. Don't expect pretty output when using these
scripts. Most other scripts, latin, cyrillic, kanji, thai etc. should work
fine, though. A somewhat difficult case are right-to-left scripts, such
as hebrew: B<rxvt-unicode> adopts the view that bidirectional algorithms
belong in the application, not the terminal emulator (too many things --
such as cursor-movement while editing -- break otherwise), but that might
change.

If you are looking for a terminal that supports more exotic scripts, let
me recommend C<mlterm>, which is a very user friendly, lean and clean
terminal emulator. In fact, the reason rxvt-unicode was born was solely
because the author couldn't get C<mlterm> to use one font for latin1 and
another for japanese.

Therefore another design rationale was the use of multiple fonts to
display characters: The idea of a single unicode font which many other
programs force onto its users never made sense to me: You should be able
to choose any font for any script freely.

Apart from that, rxvt-unicode is also much better internationalised than
its predecessor, supports things such as XFT and ISO 14755 that are handy
in i18n-environments, is faster, and has a lot bugs less than the original
rxvt. This all in addition to dozens of other small improvements.

It is still faithfully following the original rxvt idea of being lean
and nice on resources: for example, you can still configure rxvt-unicode
without most of its features to get a lean binary. It also comes with
a client/daemon pair that lets you open any number of terminal windows
from within a single process, which makes startup time very fast and
drastically reduces memory usage. See @@RXVT_NAME@@d(1) (daemon) and
@@RXVT_NAME@@c(1) (client).

It also makes technical information about escape sequences (which have
been extended) more accessible: see @@RXVT_NAME@@(7) for technical
reference documentation (escape sequences etc.).

=head1 OPTIONS

The B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> options (mostly a subset of I<xterm>'s) are listed
below. In keeping with the smaller-is-better philosophy, options may be
eliminated or default values chosen at compile-time, so options and
defaults listed may not accurately reflect the version installed on
your system. `@@RXVT_NAME@@ -h' gives a list of major compile-time options on
the I<Options> line. Option descriptions may be prefixed with which
compile option each is dependent upon. e.g. `Compile I<XIM>:' requires
I<XIM> on the I<Options> line. Note: `@@RXVT_NAME@@ -help' gives a list of all
command-line options compiled into your version.

Note that B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> permits the resource name to be used as a
long-option (--/++ option) so the potential command-line options are
far greater than those listed. For example: `@@RXVT_NAME@@ --loginShell --color1
Orange'.

The following options are available:

=over 4

=item B<-help>, B<--help>

Print out a message describing available options.

=item B<-display> I<displayname>

Attempt to open a window on the named X display (the older form B<-d>
is still respected. but deprecated). In the absence of this option, the
display specified by the B<DISPLAY> environment variable is used.

=item B<-depth> I<bitdepth>

Compile I<xft>: Attempt to find a visual with the given bit depth;
resource B<depth>.

[Please note that many X servers (and libXft) are buggy with
respect to C<-depth 32> and/or alpha channels, and will cause all sorts
of graphical corruption. This is harmless, but we can't do anything about
this, so watch out]

=item B<-geometry> I<geom>

Window geometry (B<-g> still respected); resource B<geometry>.

=item B<-rv>|B<+rv>

Turn on/off simulated reverse video; resource B<reverseVideo>.

=item B<-j>|B<+j>

Turn on/off jump scrolling (allow multiple lines per refresh); resource B<jumpScroll>.

=item B<-ss>|B<+ss>

Turn on/off skip scrolling (allow multiple screens per refresh); resource B<skipScroll>.

=item B<-tr>|B<+tr>

Turn on/off pseudo-transparency by using the root pixmap as background; resource B<transparent>.

B<-ip> is still accepted as an obsolete alias but will be removed in
future versions.

=item B<-fade> I<number>

Fade the text by the given percentage when focus is lost. Small values
fade a little only, 100 completely replaces all colours by the fade
colour; resource B<fading>.

=item B<-fadecolor> I<colour>

Fade to this colour when fading is used (see B<-fade>). The default colour
is opaque black. resource B<fadeColor>.

=item B<-tint> I<colour>

Tint the transparent background with the given colour;
resource I<tintColor>.

=item B<-sh> I<number>

Darken (0 .. 99) or lighten (101 .. 200) the transparent background.
A value of 100 means no shading; resource I<shading>.

=item B<-blt> I<string>

Specify background blending type. If background pixmap is specified
at the same time as transparency - such pixmap will be blended over
the transparent background, using the method specified. Supported values are:
B<add>, B<alphablend>, B<allanon> - colour values averaging, B<colorize>,
B<darken>, B<diff>, B<dissipate>, B<hue>, B<lighten>, B<overlay>,
B<saturate>, B<screen>, B<sub>, B<tint>, B<value>. The default is
alpha-blending. Compile I<afterimage>; resource I<blendType>.

=item B<-blr> I<HxV>

Apply Gaussian Blur with the specified radii to the transparent
background. If a single number is specified, the vertical and
horizontal radii are considered to be the same. Setting one of the
radii to 1 and the other to a large number creates interesting effects
on some backgrounds. The maximum radius value is 128. An horizontal or
vertical radius of 0 disables blurring;
resource I<blurRadius>.

=item B<-icon> I<file>

Compile I<afterimage> or I<pixbuf>: Use the specified image as application icon. This
is used by many window managers, taskbars and pagers to represent the
application window; resource I<iconFile>.

=item B<-bg> I<colour>

Window background colour; resource B<background>.

=item B<-fg> I<colour>

Window foreground colour; resource B<foreground>.

=item B<-pixmap> I<file[;oplist]>

Compile I<afterimage> or I<pixbuf>: Specify image file for the background and also
optionally specify a list of operations to modify it. Note you may need to
add quotes to avoid special shell interpretation of the C<;> in the
command-line; for more details see resource B<backgroundPixmap>.

=item B<-cr> I<colour>

The cursor colour; resource B<cursorColor>.

=item B<-pr> I<colour>

The mouse pointer foreground colour; resource B<pointerColor>.

=item B<-pr2> I<colour>

The mouse pointer background colour; resource B<pointerColor2>.

=item B<-bd> I<colour>

The colour of the border around the text area and between the scrollbar and the text;
resource B<borderColor>.

=item B<-fn> I<fontlist>

Select the fonts to be used. This is a comma separated list of font names
that are checked in order when trying to find glyphs for characters. The
first font defines the cell size for characters; other fonts might be
smaller, but not (in general) larger. A (hopefully) reasonable default
font list is always appended to it. See resource B<font> for more details.

In short, to specify an X11 core font, just specify its name or prefix it
with C<x:>. To specify an XFT-font, you need to prefix it with C<xft:>,
e.g.:

   @@RXVT_NAME@@ -fn "xft:Bitstream Vera Sans Mono:pixelsize=15"
   @@RXVT_NAME@@ -fn "9x15bold,xft:Bitstream Vera Sans Mono"

See also the question "How does rxvt-unicode choose fonts?" in the FAQ
section of @@RXVT_NAME@@(7).

=item B<-fb> I<fontlist>

Compile I<font-styles>: The bold font list to use when B<bold> characters
are to be printed. See resource B<boldFont> for details.

=item B<-fi> I<fontlist>

Compile I<font-styles>: The italic font list to use when I<italic>
characters are to be printed. See resource B<italicFont> for details.

=item B<-fbi> I<fontlist>

Compile I<font-styles>: The bold italic font list to use when B<< I<bold
italic> >> characters are to be printed. See resource B<boldItalicFont>
for details.

=item B<-is>|B<+is>

Compile I<font-styles>: Bold/Blink font styles imply high intensity
foreground/background (default). See resource B<intensityStyles> for
details.

=item B<-name> I<name>

Specify the application name under which resources are to be obtained,
rather than the default executable file name. Name should not contain
`.' or `*' characters. Also sets the icon and title name.

=item B<-ls>|B<+ls>

Start as a login-shell/sub-shell; resource B<loginShell>.

=item B<-ut>|B<+ut>

Compile I<utmp>: Inhibit/enable writing a utmp entry; resource
B<utmpInhibit>.

=item B<-vb>|B<+vb>

Turn on/off visual bell on receipt of a bell character; resource
B<visualBell>.

=item B<-sb>|B<+sb>

Turn on/off scrollbar; resource B<scrollBar>.

=item B<-sr>|B<+sr>

Put scrollbar on right/left; resource B<scrollBar_right>.

=item B<-st>|B<+st>

Display rxvt (non XTerm/NeXT) scrollbar without/with a trough;
resource B<scrollBar_floating>.

=item B<-si>|B<+si>

Turn on/off scroll-to-bottom on TTY output inhibit; resource
B<scrollTtyOutput> has opposite effect.

=item B<-sk>|B<+sk>

Turn on/off scroll-to-bottom on keypress; resource
B<scrollTtyKeypress>.

=item B<-sw>|B<+sw>

Turn on/off scrolling with the scrollback buffer as new lines appear.
This only takes effect if B<-si> is also given; resource
B<scrollWithBuffer>.

=item B<-ptab>|B<+ptab>

If enabled (default), "Horizontal Tab" characters are being stored as
actual wide characters in the screen buffer, which makes it possible to
select and paste them. Since a horizontal tab is a cursor movement and
not an actual glyph, this can sometimes be visually annoying as the cursor
on a tab character is displayed as a wide cursor; resource B<pastableTabs>.

=item B<-bc>|B<+bc>

Blink the cursor; resource B<cursorBlink>.

=item B<-uc>|B<+uc>

Make the cursor underlined; resource B<cursorUnderline>.

=item B<-iconic>

Start iconified, if the window manager supports that option.
Alternative form is B<-ic>.

=item B<-sl> I<number>

Save I<number> lines in the scrollback buffer. See resource entry for
limits; resource B<saveLines>.

=item B<-b> I<number>

Compile I<frills>: Internal border of I<number> pixels. See resource
entry for limits; resource B<internalBorder>.

=item B<-w> I<number>

Compile I<frills>: External border of I<number> pixels. Also, B<-bw>
and B<-borderwidth>. See resource entry for limits; resource
B<externalBorder>.

=item B<-bl>

Compile I<frills>: Set MWM hints to request a borderless window, i.e.
if honoured by the WM, the rxvt-unicode window will not have window
decorations; resource B<borderLess>. If the window manager does not
support MWM hints (e.g. kwin), enables override-redirect mode.

=item B<-override-redirect>

Compile I<frills>: Sets override-redirect on the window; resource
B<override-redirect>.

=item B<-sbg>

Compile I<frills>: Disable the usage of the built-in block graphics/line
drawing characters and just rely on what the specified fonts provide. Use
this if you have a good font and want to use its block graphic glyphs;
resource B<skipBuiltinGlyphs>.

=item B<-lsp> I<number>

Compile I<frills>: Lines (pixel height) to insert between each row of
the display. Useful to work around font rendering problems; resource
B<lineSpace>.

=item B<-letsp> I<number>

Compile I<frills>: Amount to adjust the computed character width by
to control overall letter spacing. Negative values will tighten up the
letter spacing, positive values will space letters out more. Useful to
work around odd font metrics; resource B<letterSpace>.

=item B<-tn> I<termname>

This option specifies the name of the terminal type to be set in the
B<TERM> environment variable. This terminal type must exist in the
I<termcap(5)> database and should have I<li#> and I<co#> entries;
resource B<termName>.

=item B<-e> I<command [arguments]>

Run the command with its command-line arguments in the B<@@RXVT_NAME@@>
window; also sets the window title and icon name to be the basename of
the program being executed if neither I<-title> (I<-T>) nor I<-n> are
given on the command line. If this option is used, it must be the last
on the command-line. If there is no B<-e> option then the default is to
run the program specified by the B<SHELL> environment variable or,
failing that, I<sh(1)>.

Please note that you must specify a program with arguments. If you want to
run shell commands, you have to specify the shell, like this:

  @@RXVT_NAME@@ -e sh -c "shell commands"

=item B<-title> I<text>

Window title (B<-T> still respected); the default title is the basename
of the program specified after the B<-e> option, if any, otherwise the
application name; resource B<title>.

=item B<-n> I<text>

Icon name; the default name is the basename of the program specified
after the B<-e> option, if any, otherwise the application name;
resource B<iconName>.

=item B<-C>

Capture system console messages.

=item B<-pt> I<style>

Compile I<XIM>: input style for input method; B<OverTheSpot>,
B<OffTheSpot>, B<Root>; resource B<preeditType>.

=item B<-im> I<text>

Compile I<XIM>: input method name. resource B<inputMethod>.

=item B<-imlocale> I<string>

The locale to use for opening the IM. You can use an C<LC_CTYPE> of e.g.
C<de_DE.UTF-8> for normal text processing but C<ja_JP.EUC-JP> for the
input extension to be able to input japanese characters while staying in
another locale. resource B<imLocale>.

=item B<-imfont> I<fontset>

Set the font set to use for the X Input Method, see resource B<imFont>
for more info.

=item B<-tcw>

Change the meaning of triple-click selection with the left mouse
button. Only effective when the original (non-perl) selection code is
in-use. Instead of selecting a full line it will extend the selection to
the end of the logical line only. resource B<tripleclickwords>.

=item B<-insecure>

Enable "insecure" mode, which currently enables most of the escape
sequences that echo strings. See the resource B<insecure> for more
info.

=item B<-mod> I<modifier>

Override detection of Meta modifier with specified key: B<alt>,
B<meta>, B<hyper>, B<super>, B<mod1>, B<mod2>, B<mod3>, B<mod4>,
B<mod5>; resource I<modifier>.

=item B<-ssc>|B<+ssc>

Turn on/off secondary screen (default enabled); resource
B<secondaryScreen>.

=item B<-ssr>|B<+ssr>

Turn on/off secondary screen scroll (default enabled); resource
B<secondaryScroll>.

=item B<-hold>|B<+hold>

Turn on/off hold window after exit support. If enabled, @@RXVT_NAME@@
will not immediately destroy its window when the program executed within
it exits. Instead, it will wait till it is being killed or closed by the
user; resource B<hold>.

=item B<-cd> I<path>

Sets the working directory for the shell (or the command specified via
B<-e>). The I<path> must be an absolute path and it must exist for
@@RXVT_NAME@@ to start; resource B<chdir>.

=item B<-xrm> I<string>

Works like the X Toolkit option of the same name, by adding the I<string>
as if it were specified in a resource file. Resource values specified this
way take precedence over all other resource specifications.

Note that you need to use the I<same> syntax as in the .Xdefaults file,
e.g. C<*.background: black>. Also note that all @@RXVT_NAME@@-specific
options can be specified as long-options on the commandline, so use
of B<-xrm> is mostly limited to cases where you want to specify other
resources (e.g. for input methods) or for compatibility with other
programs.

=item B<-keysym.>I<sym> I<string>

Remap a key symbol. See resource B<keysym>.

=item B<-embed> I<windowid>

Tells @@RXVT_NAME@@ to embed its windows into an already-existing window,
which enables applications to easily embed a terminal.

Right now, @@RXVT_NAME@@ will first unmap/map the specified window, so it
shouldn't be a top-level window. @@RXVT_NAME@@ will also reconfigure it
quite a bit, so don't expect it to keep some specific state. It's best to
create an extra subwindow for @@RXVT_NAME@@ and leave it alone.

The window will not be destroyed when @@RXVT_NAME@@ exits.

It might be useful to know that @@RXVT_NAME@@ will not close file
descriptors passed to it (except for stdin/out/err, of course), so you
can use file descriptors to communicate with the programs within the
terminal. This works regardless of whether the C<-embed> option was used or
not.

Here is a short Gtk2-perl snippet that illustrates how this option can be
used (a longer example is in F<doc/embed>):

   my $rxvt = new Gtk2::Socket;
   $rxvt->signal_connect_after (realize => sub {
      my $xid = $_[0]->window->get_xid;
      system "@@RXVT_NAME@@ -embed $xid &";
   });

=item B<-pty-fd> I<file descriptor>

Tells @@RXVT_NAME@@ NOT to execute any commands or create a new pty/tty
pair but instead use the given file descriptor as the tty master. This is
useful if you want to drive @@RXVT_NAME@@ as a generic terminal emulator
without having to run a program within it.

If this switch is given, @@RXVT_NAME@@ will not create any utmp/wtmp
entries and will not tinker with pty/tty permissions - you have to do that
yourself if you want that.

As an extremely special case, specifying C<-1> will completely suppress
pty/tty operations, which is probably only useful in conjunction with some
perl extension that manages the terminal.

Here is a example in perl that illustrates how this option can be used (a
longer example is in F<doc/pty-fd>):

   use IO::Pty;
   use Fcntl;

   my $pty = new IO::Pty;
   fcntl $pty, F_SETFD, 0; # clear close-on-exec
   system "@@RXVT_NAME@@ -pty-fd " . (fileno $pty) . "&";
   close $pty;

   # now communicate with rxvt
   my $slave = $pty->slave;
   while (<$slave>) { print $slave "got <$_>\n" }

=item B<-pe> I<string>

Comma-separated list of perl extension scripts to use (or not to use) in
this terminal instance. See resource B<perl-ext> for details.

=back

=head1 RESOURCES

Note: `@@RXVT_NAME@@ --help' gives a list of all resources (long
options) compiled into your version. All resources are also available as
long-options.

You can set and change the resources using X11 tools like B<xrdb>. Many
distribution do also load settings from the B<~/.Xresources> file when X
starts. @@RXVT_NAME@@ will consult the following files/resources in order,
with later settings overwriting earlier ones:

  1. app-defaults file in $XAPPLRESDIR
  2. $HOME/.Xdefaults
  3. RESOURCE_MANAGER property on root-window of screen 0
  4. SCREEN_RESOURCES property on root-window of the current screen
  5. $XENVIRONMENT file OR $HOME/.Xdefaults-<nodename>
  6. resources specified via -xrm on the commandline

Note that when reading X resources, B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> recognizes two class
names: B<Rxvt> and B<URxvt>. The class name B<Rxvt> allows resources
common to both B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> and the original I<rxvt> to be easily
configured, while the class name B<URxvt> allows resources unique to
B<@@RXVT_NAME@@>, to be shared between different B<@@RXVT_NAME@@>
configurations. If no resources are specified, suitable defaults will
be used. Command-line arguments can be used to override resource
settings. The following resources are supported (you might want to
check the @@RXVT_NAME@@perl(3) manpage for additional settings by perl
extensions not documented here):

=over 4

=item B<depth:> I<bitdepth>

Compile I<xft>: Attempt to find a visual with the given bit depth;
option B<-depth>.

=item B<buffered:> I<boolean>

Compile I<xft>: Turn on/off double-buffering for xft (default enabled).
On some card/driver combination enabling it slightly decreases
performance, on most it greatly helps it. The slowdown is small, so it
should normally be enabled.

=item B<geometry:> I<geom>

Create the window with the specified X window geometry [default 80x24];
option B<-geometry>.

=item B<background:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour as the window's background colour [default
White]; option B<-bg>.

=item B<foreground:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour as the window's foreground colour [default
Black]; option B<-fg>.

=item B<color>I<n>B<:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour for the colour value I<n>, where 0-7
corresponds to low-intensity (normal) colours and 8-15 corresponds to
high-intensity (bold = bright foreground, blink = bright background)
colours. The canonical names are as follows: 0=black, 1=red, 2=green,
3=yellow, 4=blue, 5=magenta, 6=cyan, 7=white, but the actual colour
names used are listed in the B<COLOURS AND GRAPHICS> section.

Colours higher than 15 cannot be set using resources (yet), but can be
changed using an escape command (see @@RXVT_NAME@@(7)).

Colours 16-79 form a standard 4x4x4 colour cube (the same as xterm with
88 colour support). Colours 80-87 are evenly spaces grey steps.

=item B<colorBD:> I<colour>

=item B<colorIT:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour to display bold or italic characters when the
foreground colour is the default. If font styles are not available
(Compile I<styles>) and this option is unset, reverse video is used instead.

=item B<colorUL:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour to display underlined characters when the
foreground colour is the default.

=item B<underlineColor:> I<colour>

If set, use the specified colour as the colour for the underline
itself. If unset, use the foreground colour.

=item B<highlightColor:> I<colour>

If set, use the specified colour as the background for highlighted
characters. If unset, use reverse video.

=item B<highlightTextColor:> I<colour>

If set and highlightColor is set, use the specified colour as the
foreground for highlighted characters.

=item B<cursorColor:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour for the cursor. The default is to use the
foreground colour; option B<-cr>.

=item B<cursorColor2:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour for the colour of the cursor text. For this to
take effect, B<cursorColor> must also be specified. The default is to
use the background colour.

=item B<reverseVideo:> I<boolean>

B<True>: simulate reverse video by foreground and background colours;
option B<-rv>. B<False>: regular screen colours [default]; option
B<+rv>. See note in B<COLOURS AND GRAPHICS> section.

=item B<jumpScroll:> I<boolean>

B<True>: specify that jump scrolling should be used. When receiving lots
of lines, @@RXVT_NAME@@ will only scroll once a whole screen height of lines
has been read, resulting in fewer updates while still displaying every
received line; option B<-j>.

B<False>: specify that smooth scrolling should be used. @@RXVT_NAME@@ will
force a screen refresh on each new line it received; option B<+j>.

=item B<skipScroll:> I<boolean>

B<True>: (the default) specify that skip scrolling should be used. When
receiving lots of lines, @@RXVT_NAME@@ will only scroll once in a while
(around 60 times per second), resulting in far fewer updates. This can
result in @@RXVT_NAME@@ not ever displaying some of the lines it receives;
option B<-ss>.

B<False>: specify that everything is to be displayed, even
if the refresh is too fast for the human eye to read anything (or the
monitor to display anything); option B<+ss>.

=item B<transparent:> I<boolean>

Turn on/off pseudo-transparency by using the root pixmap as background.

B<inheritPixmap> is still accepted as an obsolete alias but will be removed in
future versions.

=item B<fading:> I<number>

Fade the text by the given percentage when focus is lost; option B<-fade>.

=item B<fadeColor:> I<colour>

Fade to this colour, when fading is used (see B<fading:>). The default
colour is black; option B<-fadecolor>.

=item B<tintColor:> I<colour>

Tint the transparent background with the given colour. If the RENDER
extension is not available only black, red, green, yellow, blue,
magenta, cyan and white tints can be performed server-side. Note that
a black tint yields a completely black image while a white tint yields
the image unchanged; option B<-tint>.

=item B<shading:> I<number>

Darken (0 .. 99) or lighten (101 .. 200) the transparent background.
A value of 100 means no shading; option B<-sh>.

=item B<blendType:> I<string>

Specify background blending type; option B<-blt>.

=item B<blurRadius:> I<number>

Apply gaussian blur with the specified radius to the transparent
background; option B<-blr>.

=item B<iconFile:> I<file>

Set the application icon pixmap; option B<-icon>.

=item B<scrollColor:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour for the scrollbar [default #B2B2B2].

=item B<troughColor:> I<colour>

Use the specified colour for the scrollbar's trough area [default
#969696]. Only relevant for rxvt (non XTerm/NeXT) scrollbar.

=item B<borderColor:> I<colour>

The colour of the border around the text area and between the scrollbar
and the text.

=item B<backgroundPixmap:> I<file[;oplist]>

Use the specified image file for the background and also
optionally specify a colon separated list of operations to modify it.
Supported operations are:

=over 4

=item B<WxH+X+Y>

sets scale and position. B<"W" / "H"> specify the horizontal/vertical
scale (percent), and B<"X" / "Y"> locate the image centre (percent). A
scale of 0 disables scaling. The maximum permitted scale is 1000.

=item B<op=tile>

enables tiling

=item B<op=keep-aspect>

maintain the image aspect ratio when scaling

=item B<op=root-align>

use the position of the terminal window relative to the root window as
the image offset, simulating a root window background

=back

The default scale and position setting is C<100x100+50+50>.
Alternatively, a predefined set of templates can be used to achieve
the most common setups:

=over 4

=item B<style=tiled>

the image is tiled with no scaling. Equivalent to 0x0+0+0:op=tile

=item B<style=aspect-stretched>

the image is scaled to fill the whole window maintaining the aspect
ratio and centered. Equivalent to 100x100+50+50:op=keep-aspect

=item B<style=stretched>

the image is scaled to fill the whole window. Equivalent to 100x100

=item B<style=centered>

the image is centered with no scaling. Equivalent to 0x0+50+50

=item B<style=root-tiled>

the image is tiled with no scaling and using 'root' positioning.
Equivalent to 0x0:op=tile:op=root-align

=back

If multiple templates are specified the last one wins. Note that a
template overrides all the scale, position and operations settings.

If used in conjunction with B<-tr> option, the specified pixmap will be
blended over the transparent background using alpha-blending. If I<afterimage>
support has been compiled in it is possible to choose other blending
types with B<-blt "type"> option.

=item B<path:> I<path>

Specify the colon-delimited search path for finding background image files.

=item B<font:> I<fontlist>

Select the fonts to be used. This is a comma separated list of font names
that are checked in order when trying to find glyphs for characters. The
first font defines the cell size for characters; other fonts might be
smaller, but not (in general) larger. A (hopefully) reasonable default
font list is always appended to it; option B<-fn>.

Each font can either be a standard X11 core font (XLFD) name, with
optional prefix C<x:> or a Xft font (Compile I<xft>), prefixed with C<xft:>.

In addition, each font can be prefixed with additional hints and
specifications enclosed in square brackets (C<[]>). The only available
hint currently is C<codeset=codeset-name>, and this is only used for Xft
fonts.

For example, this font resource

   URxvt.font: 9x15bold,\
               -misc-fixed-bold-r-normal--15-140-75-75-c-90-iso10646-1,\
               -misc-fixed-medium-r-normal--15-140-75-75-c-90-iso10646-1, \
               [codeset=JISX0208]xft:Kochi Gothic:antialias=false, \
               xft:Code2000:antialias=false

specifies five fonts to be used. The first one is C<9x15bold> (actually
the iso8859-1 version of the second font), which is the base font (because
it is named first) and thus defines the character cell grid to be 9 pixels
wide and 15 pixels high.

The second font is just used to add additional unicode characters not in
the base font, likewise the third, which is unfortunately non-bold, but
the bold version of the font does contain fewer characters, so this is a
useful supplement.

The third font is an Xft font with aliasing turned off, and the characters
are limited to the B<JIS 0208> codeset (i.e. japanese kanji). The font
contains other characters, but we are not interested in them.

The last font is a useful catch-all font that supplies most of the
remaining unicode characters.

=item B<boldFont:> I<fontlist>

=item B<italicFont:> I<fontlist>

=item B<boldItalicFont:> I<fontlist>

The font list to use for displaying B<bold>, I<italic> or B<< I<bold
italic> >> characters, respectively.

If specified and non-empty, then the syntax is the same as for the
B<font>-resource, and the given font list will be used as is, which makes
it possible to substitute completely different font styles for bold and
italic.

If unset (the default), a suitable font list will be synthesized by
"morphing" the normal text font list into the desired shape. If that is
not possible, replacement fonts of the desired shape will be tried.

If set, but empty, then this specific style is disabled and the normal
text font will being used for the given style.

=item B<intensityStyles:> I<boolean>

When font styles are not enabled, or this option is enabled (B<True>,
option B<-is>, the default), bold/blink font styles imply high
intensity foreground/background colours. Disabling this option (B<False>,
option B<+is>) disables this behaviour, the high intensity colours are not
reachable.

=item B<title:> I<string>

Set window title string, the default title is the command-line
specified after the B<-e> option, if any, otherwise the application
name; option B<-title>.

=item B<iconName:> I<string>

Set the name used to label the window's icon or displayed in an icon
manager window, it also sets the window's title unless it is explicitly
set; option B<-n>.

=item B<mapAlert:> I<boolean>

B<True>: de-iconify (map) on receipt of a bell character. B<False>: no
de-iconify (map) on receipt of a bell character [default].

=item B<urgentOnBell:> I<boolean>

B<True>: set the urgency hint for the wm on receipt of a bell character.
B<False>: do not set the urgency hint [default].

@@RXVT_NAME@@ resets the urgency hint on every focus change.

=item B<visualBell:> I<boolean>

B<True>: use visual bell on receipt of a bell character; option B<-vb>.
B<False>: no visual bell [default]; option B<+vb>.

=item B<loginShell:> I<boolean>

B<True>: start as a login shell by prepending a `-' to B<argv[0]> of
the shell; option B<-ls>. B<False>: start as a normal sub-shell
[default]; option B<+ls>.

=item B<utmpInhibit:> I<boolean>

B<True>: inhibit writing record into the system log file B<utmp>;
option B<-ut>. B<False>: write record into the system log file B<utmp>
[default]; option B<+ut>.

=item B<print-pipe:> I<string>

Specify a command pipe for vt100 printer [default I<lpr(1)>]. Use
B<Print> to initiate a screen dump to the printer and B<Ctrl-Print> or
B<Shift-Print> to include the scrollback as well.

The string will be interpreted as if typed into the shell as-is.

Example:

   URxvt.print-pipe: cat > $(TMPDIR=$HOME mktemp urxvt.XXXXXX)

This creates a new file in your home directory with the screen contents
every time you hit C<Print>.

=item B<scrollstyle:> I<mode>

Set scrollbar style to B<rxvt>, B<plain>, B<next> or B<xterm>. B<plain> is
the author's favourite.

=item B<thickness:> I<number>

Set the scrollbar width in pixels.

=item B<scrollBar:> I<boolean>

B<True>: enable the scrollbar [default]; option B<-sb>. B<False>:
disable the scrollbar; option B<+sb>.

=item B<scrollBar_right:> I<boolean>

B<True>: place the scrollbar on the right of the window; option B<-sr>.
B<False>: place the scrollbar on the left of the window; option B<+sr>.

=item B<scrollBar_floating:> I<boolean>

B<True>: display an rxvt scrollbar without a trough; option B<-st>.
B<False>: display an rxvt scrollbar with a trough; option B<+st>.

=item B<scrollBar_align:> I<mode>

Align the B<top>, B<bottom> or B<centre> [default] of the scrollbar
thumb with the pointer on middle button press/drag.

=item B<scrollTtyOutput:> I<boolean>

B<True>: scroll to bottom when tty receives output; option B<-si>.
B<False>: do not scroll to bottom when tty receives output; option
B<+si>.

=item B<scrollWithBuffer:> I<boolean>

B<True>: scroll with scrollback buffer when tty receives new lines (i.e.
try to show the same lines) and B<scrollTtyOutput> is False; option
B<-sw>. B<False>: do not scroll with scrollback buffer when tty receives
new lines; option B<+sw>.

=item B<scrollTtyKeypress:> I<boolean>

B<True>: scroll to bottom when a non-special key is pressed. Special keys
are those which are intercepted by rxvt-unicode for special handling and
are not passed onto the shell; option B<-sk>. B<False>: do not scroll to
bottom when a non-special key is pressed; option B<+sk>.

=item B<saveLines:> I<number>

Save I<number> lines in the scrollback buffer [default 64]. This
resource is limited on most machines to 65535; option B<-sl>.

=item B<internalBorder:> I<number>

Internal border of I<number> pixels. This resource is limited to 100;
option B<-b>.

=item B<externalBorder:> I<number>

External border of I<number> pixels. This resource is limited to 100;
option B<-w>, B<-bw>, B<-borderwidth>.

=item B<borderLess:> I<boolean>

Set MWM hints to request a borderless window, i.e. if honoured by the
WM, the rxvt-unicode window will not have window decorations; option B<-bl>.

=item B<skipBuiltinGlyphs:> I<boolean>

Compile I<frills>: Disable the usage of the built-in block graphics/line
drawing characters and just rely on what the specified fonts provide. Use
this if you have a good font and want to use its block graphic glyphs;
option B<-sbg>.

=item B<termName:> I<termname>

Specifies the terminal type name to be set in the B<TERM> environment
variable; option B<-tn>.

=item B<lineSpace:> I<number>

Specifies number of lines (pixel height) to insert between each row of
the display [default 0]; option B<-lsp>.

=item B<meta8:> I<boolean>

B<True>: handle Meta (Alt) + keypress to set the 8th bit. B<False>:
handle Meta (Alt) + keypress as an escape prefix [default].

=item B<mouseWheelScrollPage:> I<boolean>

B<True>: the mouse wheel scrolls a page full. B<False>: the mouse wheel
scrolls five lines [default].

=item B<pastableTabs:> I<boolean>

B<True>: store tabs as wide characters. B<False>: interpret tabs as cursor
movement only; option C<-ptab>.

=item B<cursorBlink:> I<boolean>

B<True>: blink the cursor. B<False>: do not blink the cursor [default];
option B<-bc>.

=item B<cursorUnderline:> I<boolean>

B<True>: Make the cursor underlined. B<False>: Make the cursor a box [default];
option B<-uc>.

=item B<pointerBlank:> I<boolean>

B<True>: blank the pointer when a key is pressed or after a set number
of seconds of inactivity. B<False>: the pointer is always visible
[default].

=item B<pointerColor:> I<colour>

Mouse pointer foreground colour.

=item B<pointerColor2:> I<colour>

Mouse pointer background colour.

=item B<pointerBlankDelay:> I<number>

Specifies number of seconds before blanking the pointer [default 2]. Use a
large number (e.g. C<987654321>) to effectively disable the timeout.

=item B<backspacekey:> I<string>

The string to send when the backspace key is pressed. If set to B<DEC>
or unset it will send B<Delete> (code 127) or, with control, B<Backspace>
(code 8) - which can be reversed with the appropriate DEC private mode
escape sequence.

=item B<deletekey:> I<string>

The string to send when the delete key (not the keypad delete key) is
pressed. If unset it will send the sequence traditionally associated
with the B<Execute> key.

=item B<cutchars:> I<string>

The characters used as delimiters for double-click word selection
(whitespace delimiting is added automatically if resource is given).

When the perl selection extension is in use (the default if compiled
in, see the @@RXVT_NAME@@perl(3) manpage), a suitable regex using these
characters will be created (if the resource exists, otherwise, no regex
will be created). In this mode, characters outside ISO-8859-1 can be used.

When the selection extension is not used, only ISO-8859-1 characters can
be used. If not specified, the built-in default is used:

B<< BACKSLASH `"'&()*,;<=>?@[]^{|} >>

=item B<preeditType:> I<style>

B<OverTheSpot>, B<OffTheSpot>, B<Root>; option B<-pt>.

=item B<inputMethod:> I<name>

I<name> of inputMethod to use; option B<-im>.

=item B<imLocale:> I<name>

The locale to use for opening the IM. You can use an C<LC_CTYPE> of e.g.
C<de_DE.UTF-8> for normal text processing but C<ja_JP.EUC-JP> for the
input extension to be able to input japanese characters while staying in
another locale; option B<-imlocale>.

=item B<imFont:> I<fontset>

Specify the font-set used for XIM styles C<OverTheSpot> or
C<OffTheSpot>. It must be a standard X font set (XLFD patterns separated
by commas), i.e. it's not in the same format as the other font lists used
in @@RXVT_NAME@@. The default will be set-up to chose *any* suitable found
found, preferably one or two pixels differing in size to the base font.
option B<-imfont>.

=item B<tripleclickwords:> I<boolean>

Change the meaning of triple-click selection with the left mouse
button. Instead of selecting a full line it will extend the selection to
the end of the logical line only; option B<-tcw>.

=item B<insecure:> I<boolean>

Enables "insecure" mode. Rxvt-unicode offers some escape sequences that
echo arbitrary strings like the icon name or the locale. This could be
abused if somebody gets 8-bit-clean access to your display, whether
through a mail client displaying mail bodies unfiltered or through
write(1) or any other means. Therefore, these sequences are disabled by
default. (Note that many other terminals, including xterm, have these
sequences enabled by default, which doesn't make it safer, though).

You can enable them by setting this boolean resource or specifying
B<-insecure> as an option. At the moment, this enables display-answer,
locale, findfont, icon label and window title requests.

=item B<modifier:> I<modifier>

Set the key to be interpreted as the Meta key to: B<alt>, B<meta>,
B<hyper>, B<super>, B<mod1>, B<mod2>, B<mod3>, B<mod4>, B<mod5>; option
B<-mod>.

=item B<answerbackString:> I<string>

Specify the reply rxvt-unicode sends to the shell when an ENQ (control-E)
character is passed through. It may contain escape values as described
in the entry on B<keysym> following.

=item B<secondaryScreen:> I<boolean>

Turn on/off secondary screen (default enabled).

=item B<secondaryScroll:> I<boolean>

Turn on/off secondary screen scroll (default enabled). If this
option is enabled, scrolls on the secondary screen will change the
scrollback buffer and, when secondaryScreen is off, switching
to/from the secondary screen will instead scroll the screen up.

=item B<hold>: I<boolean>

Turn on/off hold window after exit support. If enabled, @@RXVT_NAME@@
will not immediately destroy its window when the program executed within
it exits. Instead, it will wait till it is being killed or closed by the
user.

=item B<chdir>: I<path>

Sets the working directory for the shell (or the command specified via
B<-e>). The I<path> must be an absolute path and it must exist for
@@RXVT_NAME@@ to start. If it isn't specified then the current working
directory will be used; option B<-cd>.

=item B<keysym.>I<sym>: I<string>

Compile I<frills>: Associate I<string> with keysym I<sym>. The
intervening resource name B<keysym.> cannot be omitted.

The format of I<sym> is "I<(modifiers-)key>", where I<modifiers> can be
any combination of B<ISOLevel3>, B<AppKeypad>, B<Control>, B<NumLock>,
B<Shift>, B<Meta>, B<Lock>, B<Mod1>, B<Mod2>, B<Mod3>, B<Mod4>, B<Mod5>,
and the abbreviated B<I>, B<K>, B<C>, B<N>, B<S>, B<M>, B<A>, B<L>, B<1>,
B<2>, B<3>, B<4>, B<5>.

The B<NumLock>, B<Meta> and B<ISOLevel3> modifiers are usually aliased to
whatever modifier the NumLock key, Meta/Alt keys or ISO Level3 Shift/AltGr
keys are being mapped. B<AppKeypad> is a synthetic modifier mapped to the
current application keymap mode state.

The spellings of I<key> can be obtained by using B<xev>(1) command or
searching keysym macros from B</usr/X11R6/include/X11/keysymdef.h> and
omitting the prefix B<XK_>. Alternatively you can specify I<key> by its hex
keysym value (B<0x0000 - 0xFFFF>). Note that the lookup of I<sym>s is not
performed in an exact manner; however, the closest match is assured.

I<string> may contain escape values (C<\n>: newline, C<\000>: octal
number), see RESOURCES in C<man 7 X> for further details.

You can define a range of keysyms in one shot by
loading the C<keysym-list> perl extension and providing a I<string>
with pattern B<list/PREFIX/MIDDLE/SUFFIX>, where the delimiter `/'
should be a character not used by the strings.

Its usage can be demonstrated by an example:

  URxvt.keysym.M-C-0x61:    list|\033<|abc|>

The above line is equivalent to the following three lines:

  URxvt.keysym.Meta-Control-0x61:    \033<a>
  URxvt.keysym.Meta-Control-0x62:    \033<b>
  URxvt.keysym.Meta-Control-0x63:    \033<c>

If I<string> takes the form of C<command:STRING>, the specified B<STRING>
is interpreted and executed as @@RXVT_NAME@@'s control sequence. For
example the following means "change the current locale to C<zh_CN.GBK>
when Control-Meta-c is being pressed":

  URxvt.keysym.M-C-c: command:\033]701;zh_CN.GBK\007

If I<string> takes the form C<perl:STRING>, then the specified B<STRING>
is passed to the C<on_user_command> perl handler. See the @@RXVT_NAME@@perl(3)
manpage. For example, the F<selection> extension (activated via
C<@@RXVT_NAME@@ -pe selection>) listens for C<selection:rot13> events:

  URxvt.keysym.M-C-c: perl:selection:rot13

Due the the large number of modifier combinations, a defined key mapping
will match if I<at least> the specified identifiers are being set, and
no other key mappings with those and more bits are being defined. That
means that defining a key map for C<a> will automatically provide
definitions for C<Meta-a>, C<Shift-a> and so on, unless some of those are defined
mappings themselves.

Unfortunately, this will override built-in key mappings. For example
if you overwrite the C<Insert> key you will disable @@RXVT_NAME@@'s
C<Shift-Insert> mapping. To re-enable that, you can poke "holes" into the
user-defined keymap using the C<builtin:> replacement:

  URxvt.keysym.Insert: <my insert key sequence>
  URxvt.keysym.S-Insert: builtin:

The first line defines a mapping for C<Insert> and I<any> combination
of modifiers. The second line re-establishes the default mapping for
C<Shift-Insert>.

The following example will map Control-Meta-1 and Control-Meta-2 to
the fonts C<suxuseuro> and C<9x15bold>, so you can have some limited
font-switching at runtime:

  URxvt.keysym.M-C-1: command:\033]50;suxuseuro\007
  URxvt.keysym.M-C-2: command:\033]50;9x15bold\007

Other things are possible, e.g. resizing (see @@RXVT_NAME@@(7) for more
info):

  URxvt.keysym.M-C-3: command:\033[8;25;80t
  URxvt.keysym.M-C-4: command:\033[8;48;110t

=item B<perl-ext-common>: I<string>

=item B<perl-ext>: I<string>

Comma-separated list(s) of perl extension scripts (default: C<default>) to
use in this terminal instance; option B<-pe>.

Extension names can be prefixed with a C<-> sign to prohibit using
them. This can be useful to selectively disable some extensions loaded
by default, or specified via the C<perl-ext-common> resource. For
example, C<default,-selection> will use all the default extension except
C<selection>.

Extension names can also be followed by an argument in angle brackets
(e.g.  C<< searchable-scrollback<M-s> >>, which binds the hotkey for
searchable scrollback to Alt/Meta-s). Mentioning the same extension
multiple times with different arguments will pass multiple arguments to
the extension.

Each extension is looked up in the library directories, loaded if
necessary, and bound to the current terminal instance.

If both of these resources are the empty string, then the perl
interpreter will not be initialized. The idea behind two options is that
B<perl-ext-common> will be used for extensions that should be available to
all instances, while B<perl-ext> is used for specific instances.

=item B<perl-eval>: I<string>

Perl code to be evaluated when all extensions have been registered. See
the @@RXVT_NAME@@perl(3) manpage.

=item B<perl-lib>: I<path>

Colon-separated list of additional directories that hold extension
scripts. When looking for perl extensions, @@RXVT_NAME@@ will first
look in these directories, then in $HOME/.urxvt/ext and lastly in
F<@@RXVT_LIBDIR@@/urxvt/perl/>.

See the @@RXVT_NAME@@perl(3) manpage.

=item B<< selection.pattern-I<idx> >>: I<perl-regex>

Additional selection patterns, see the @@RXVT_NAME@@perl(3) manpage for
details.

=item B<< selection-autotransform.I<idx> >>: I<perl-transform>

Selection auto-transform patterns, see the @@RXVT_NAME@@perl(3) manpage
for details.

=item B<searchable-scrollback:> I<keysym>

Sets the hotkey that starts the incremental scrollback buffer search
(default: C<M-s>).

=item B<urlLauncher>: I<string>

Specifies the program to be started with a URL argument. Used by the
C<selection-popup> and C<matcher> perl extensions.

=item B<transient-for>: I<windowid>

Compile I<frills>: Sets the WM_TRANSIENT_FOR property to the given window id.

=item B<override-redirect>: I<boolean>

Compile I<frills>: Sets override-redirect for the terminal window, making
it almost invisible to window managers; option B<-override-redirect>.

=item B<iso14755:> I<boolean>

Turn on/off ISO 14755 (default enabled).

=item B<iso14755_52:> I<boolean>

Turn on/off ISO 14755 5.2 mode (default enabled).

=back

=head1 THE SCROLLBAR

Lines of text that scroll off the top of the B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> window
(resource: B<saveLines>) and can be scrolled back using the scrollbar
or by keystrokes. The normal B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> scrollbar has arrows and
its behaviour is fairly intuitive. The B<xterm-scrollbar> is without
arrows and its behaviour mimics that of I<xterm>

Scroll down with B<Button1> (B<xterm-scrollbar>) or B<Shift-Next>.
Scroll up with B<Button3> (B<xterm-scrollbar>) or B<Shift-Prior>.
Continuous scroll with B<Button2>.

=head1 MOUSE REPORTING

To temporarily override mouse reporting, for either the scrollbar or
the normal text selection/insertion, hold either the Shift or the Meta
(Alt) key while performing the desired mouse action.

If mouse reporting mode is active, the normal scrollbar actions are
disabled -- on the assumption that we are using a fullscreen
application. Instead, pressing Button1 and Button3 sends B<ESC [ 6 ~>
(Next) and B<ESC [ 5 ~> (Prior), respectively. Similarly, clicking on the
up and down arrows sends B<ESC [ A> (Up) and B<ESC [ B> (Down),
respectively.

=head1 THE SELECTION: SELECTING AND PASTING TEXT

The behaviour of text selection and insertion/pasting mechanism is similar
to I<xterm>(1).

=over 4

=item B<Selecting>:

Left click at the beginning of the region, drag to the end of the region
and release; Right click to extend the marked region; Left double-click
to select a word; Left triple-click to select the entire logical line
(which can span multiple screen lines), unless modified by resource
B<tripleclickwords>.

Starting a selection while pressing the B<Meta> key (or B<Meta+Ctrl> keys)
(Compile: I<frills>) will create a rectangular selection instead of a
normal one. In this mode, every selected row becomes its own line in the
selection, and trailing whitespace is visually underlined and removed from
the selection.

=item B<Pasting>:

Pressing and releasing the Middle mouse button in an B<@@RXVT_NAME@@>
window causes the value of the PRIMARY selection (or CLIPBOARD with the
B<Meta> modifier) to be inserted as if it had been typed on the keyboard.

Pressing B<Shift-Insert> causes the value of the PRIMARY selection to be
inserted too.

=back

=head1 CHANGING FONTS

Changing fonts (or font sizes, respectively) via the keypad is not yet
supported in rxvt-unicode. Bug me if you need this.

You can, however, switch fonts at runtime using escape sequences, e.g.:

   printf '\e]710;%s\007' "9x15bold,xft:Kochi Gothic"

You can use keyboard shortcuts, too:

   URxvt.keysym.M-C-1: command:\033]710;suxuseuro\007\033]711;suxuseuro\007
   URxvt.keysym.M-C-2: command:\033]710;9x15bold\007\033]711;9x15bold\007

rxvt-unicode will automatically re-apply these fonts to the output so far.

=head1 ISO 14755 SUPPORT

ISO 14755 is a standard for entering and viewing unicode characters
and character codes using the keyboard. It consists of 4 parts. The
first part is available if rxvt-unicode has been compiled with
C<--enable-frills>, the rest is available when rxvt-unicode was compiled
with C<--enable-iso14755>.

=over 4

=item * 5.1: Basic method

This allows you to enter unicode characters using their hexcode.

Start by pressing and holding both C<Control> and C<Shift>, then enter
hex-digits (between one and six). Releasing C<Control> and C<Shift> will
commit the character as if it were typed directly. While holding down
C<Control> and C<Shift> you can also enter multiple characters by pressing
C<Space>, which will commit the current character and lets you start a new
one.

As an example of use, imagine a business card with a japanese e-mail
address, which you cannot type. Fortunately, the card has the e-mail
address printed as hexcodes, e.g. C<671d 65e5>. You can enter this easily
by pressing C<Control> and C<Shift>, followed by C<6-7-1-D-SPACE-6-5-E-5>,
followed by releasing the modifier keys.

=item * 5.2: Keyboard symbols entry method

This mode lets you input characters representing the keycap symbols of
your keyboard, if representable in the current locale encoding.

Start by pressing C<Control> and C<Shift> together, then releasing
them. The next special key (cursor keys, home etc.) you enter will not
invoke its usual function but instead will insert the corresponding
keycap symbol. The symbol will only be entered when the key has been
released, otherwise pressing e.g. C<Shift> would enter the symbol for
C<ISO Level 2 Switch>, although your intention might have been to enter a
reverse tab (Shift-Tab).

=item * 5.3: Screen-selection entry method

While this is implemented already (it's basically the selection
mechanism), it could be extended by displaying a unicode character map.

=item * 5.4: Feedback method for identifying displayed characters for later input

This method lets you display the unicode character code associated with
characters already displayed.

You enter this mode by holding down C<Control> and C<Shift> together, then
pressing and holding the left mouse button and moving around. The unicode
hex code(s) (it might be a combining character) of the character under the
pointer is displayed until you release C<Control> and C<Shift>.

In addition to the hex codes it will display the font used to draw this
character - due to implementation reasons, characters combined with
combining characters, line drawing characters and unknown characters will
always be drawn using the built-in support font.

=back

With respect to conformance, rxvt-unicode is supposed to be compliant to
both scenario A and B of ISO 14755, including part 5.2.

=head1 LOGIN STAMP

B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> tries to write an entry into the I<utmp>(5) file so that
it can be seen via the I<who(1)> command, and can accept messages.  To
allow this feature, B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> may need to be installed setuid root
on some systems or setgid to root or to some other group on others.

=head1 COLOURS AND GRAPHICS

In addition to the default foreground and background colours,
B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> can display up to 88/256 colours: 8 ANSI colours plus
high-intensity (potentially bold/blink) versions of the same, and 72 (or
240 in 256 colour mode) colours arranged in an 4x4x4 (or 6x6x6) colour RGB
cube plus a 8 (24) colour greyscale ramp.

Here is a list of the ANSI colours with their names.

=begin table

	B<color0>	(black)	= Black
	B<color1>	(red)	= Red3
	B<color2>	(green)	= Green3
	B<color3>	(yellow)	= Yellow3
	B<color4>	(blue)	= Blue3
	B<color5>	(magenta)	= Magenta3
	B<color6>	(cyan)	= Cyan3
	B<color7>	(white)	= AntiqueWhite
	B<color8>	(bright black)	= Grey25
	B<color9>	(bright red)	= Red
	B<color10>	(bright green)	= Green
	B<color11>	(bright yellow)	= Yellow
	B<color12>	(bright blue)	= Blue
	B<color13>	(bright magenta)	= Magenta
	B<color14>	(bright cyan)	= Cyan
	B<color15>	(bright white)	= White
	B<foreground>		= Black
	B<background>		= White

=end table

It is also possible to specify the colour values of B<foreground>,
B<background>, B<cursorColor>, B<cursorColor2>, B<colorBD>, B<colorUL> as
a number 0-15, as a convenient shorthand to reference the colour name of
color0-color15.

The following text gives values for the standard 88 colour mode (and
values for the 256 colour mode in parentheses).

The RGB cube uses indices 16..79 (16..231) using the following formulas:

   index_88  = (r *  4 + g) *  4 + b + 16   # r, g, b = 0..3
   index_256 = (r * 16 + g) * 16 + b + 16   # r, g, b = 0..15

The grayscale ramp uses indices 80..87 (232..239), from 10% to 90% in 10%
steps (1/26 to 25/26 in 1/26 steps) - black and white are already part of
the RGB cube.

Together, all those colours implement the 88 (256) colour xterm
colours. Only the first 16 can be changed using resources currently, the
rest can only be changed via command sequences ("escape codes").

Applications are advised to use terminfo or command sequences to discover
number and RGB values of all colours (yes, you can query this...).

Note that B<-rv> (B<"reverseVideo: True">) simulates reverse video by
always swapping the foreground/background colours. This is in contrast to
I<xterm>(1) where the colours are only swapped if they have not otherwise
been specified. For example,

   @@RXVT_NAME@@ -fg Black -bg White -rv

would yield White on Black, while on I<xterm>(1) it would yield Black on
White.

=head2 ALPHA CHANNEL SUPPORT

If Xft support has been compiled in and as long as Xft/Xrender/X don't get
their act together, rxvt-unicode will do its own alpha channel management:

You can prefix any colour with an opaqueness percentage enclosed in
brackets, i.e. C<[percent]>, where C<percent> is a decimal percentage
(0-100) that specifies the opacity of the colour, where C<0> is completely
transparent and C<100> is completely opaque. For example, C<[50]red> is a
half-transparent red, while C<[95]#00ff00> is an almost opaque green. This
is the recommended format to specify transparency values, and works with
all ways to specify a colour.

For complete control, rxvt-unicode also supports
C<rgba:rrrr/gggg/bbbb/aaaa> (exactly four hex digits/component) colour
specifications, where the additional C<aaaa> component specifies opacity
(alpha) values. The minimum value of C<0000> is completely transparent,
while C<ffff> is completely opaque). The two example colours from
earlier could also be specified as C<rgba:ff00/0000/0000/8000> and
C<rgba:0000/ff00/0000/f332>.

You probably need to specify B<"-depth 32">, too, to force a visual with
alpha channels, and have the luck that your X-server uses ARGB pixel
layout, as X is far from just supporting ARGB visuals out of the box, and
rxvt-unicode just fudges around.

For example, the following selects an almost completely transparent black
background, and an almost opaque pink foreground:

   @@RXVT_NAME@@ -depth 32 -bg rgba:0000/0000/0000/4444 -fg "[80]pink"

When not using a background image, then the interpretation of the
alpha channel is up to your compositing manager (most interpret it as
transparency of course).

When using a background pixmap or pseudo-transparency, then the background
colour will always behave as if it were completely transparent (so the
background image shows instead), regardless of how it was specified, while
other colours will either be transparent as specified (the background
image will show through) on servers supporting the RENDER extension, or
fully opaque on servers not supporting the RENDER EXTENSION.

Please note that due to bugs in Xft, specifying alpha values might result
in garbage being displayed when the X-server does not support the RENDER
extension.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

B<@@RXVT_NAME@@> sets and/or uses the following environment variables:

=over 4

=item B<TERM>

Normally set to C<rxvt-unicode>, unless overwritten at configure time, via
resources or on the command line.

=item B<COLORTERM>

Either C<rxvt>, C<rxvt-xpm>, depending on whether @@RXVT_NAME@@ was
compiled with background image support, and optionally with the added
extension C<-mono> to indicate that rxvt-unicode runs on a monochrome
screen.

=item B<COLORFGBG>

Set to a string of the form C<fg;bg> or C<fg;xpm;bg>, where C<fg> is
the colour code used as default foreground/text colour (or the string
C<default> to indicate that the default-colour escape sequence is to be
used), C<bg> is the colour code used as default background colour (or the
string C<default>), and C<xpm> is the string C<default> if @@RXVT_NAME@@
was compiled with background image support. Libraries like C<ncurses>
and C<slang> can (and do) use this information to optimize screen output.

=item B<WINDOWID>

Set to the (decimal) X Window ID of the @@RXVT_NAME@@ window (the toplevel
window, which usually has subwindows for the scrollbar, the terminal
window and so on).

=item B<TERMINFO>

Set to the terminfo directory iff @@RXVT_NAME@@ was configured with
C<--with-terminfo=PATH>.

=item B<DISPLAY>

Used by @@RXVT_NAME@@ to connect to the display and set to the correct
display in its child processes if C<-display> isn't used to override. It
defaults to C<:0> if it doesn't exist.

=item B<SHELL>

The shell to be used for command execution, defaults to C</bin/sh>.

=item B<RXVT_SOCKET>

The unix domain socket path used by @@RXVT_NAME@@c(1) and
@@RXVT_NAME@@d(1).

Default F<<< $HOME/.urxvt/urxvtd-I<< <nodename> >> >>>.

=item B<HOME>

Used to locate the default directory for the unix domain socket for
daemon communications and to locate various resource files (such as
C<.Xdefaults>)

=item B<XAPPLRESDIR>

Directory where application-specific X resource files are located.

=item B<XENVIRONMENT>

If set and accessible, gives the name of a X resource file to be loaded by
@@RXVT_NAME@@.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item B</usr/lib/X11/rgb.txt>

Colour names.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

@@RXVT_NAME@@(7), @@RXVT_NAME@@c(1), @@RXVT_NAME@@d(1), xterm(1), sh(1), resize(1), X(1), pty(4), tty(4), utmp(5)

=head1 CURRENT PROJECT COORDINATOR

=over 4

=item Project Coordinator

Marc A. Lehmann L<< <rxvt-unicode@schmorp.de> >>

L<http://software.schmorp.de/pkg/rxvt-unicode.html>

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

=over 4

=item John Bovey

University of Kent, 1992, wrote the original Xvt.

=item Rob Nation L<< <nation@rocket.sanders.lockheed.com> >>

very heavily modified Xvt and came up with Rxvt

=item Angelo Haritsis L<< <ah@doc.ic.ac.uk> >>

wrote the Greek Keyboard Input (no longer in code)

=item mj olesen L<< <olesen@me.QueensU.CA> >>

Wrote the menu system.

Project Coordinator (changes.txt 2.11 to 2.21)

=item Oezguer Kesim L<< <kesim@math.fu-berlin.de> >>

Project Coordinator (changes.txt 2.21a to 2.4.5)

=item Geoff Wing L<< <gcw@pobox.com> >>

Rewrote screen display and text selection routines.

Project Coordinator (changes.txt 2.4.6 - rxvt-unicode)

=item Marc Alexander Lehmann L<< <rxvt-unicode@schmorp.de> >>

Forked rxvt-unicode, unicode support, rewrote almost all the code, perl
extension, random hacks, numerous bugfixes and extensions.

Project Coordinator (Changes 1.0 -)

=item Emanuele Giaquinta L<< <e.giaquinta@glauco.it> >>

pty/utmp code rewrite, image code improvements, many random hacks and bugfixes.

=back

